hey it's your friend mel and welcome to the mel robbins podcast you know i've been thinking a lot about my dad lately i've been thinking about how the years have just flown by i mean i can't believe he's already 80 and the fact is i wanna see him more often i wanna connect with him on a deeper level learn more about him because if i'm lucky i've got like 10 or 15 more years with him and i really wanna enjoy the time that we have together maybe you feel that way about someone you care about too you know 1 thing i've come to realize is that there's never enough time with the people you love and knowing that doesn't it just create the sense of urgency to say the things that matter ask the questions you've never asked try to do just a little bit better and that's what makes today's guest
so special to say that he has a way with words is a massive understatement in our boston studios today we have 1 of the single best selling authors of our lifetime i'm talking about the 1 and only james patterson he's the record breaking literary legend who has sold more than 400,000,000 books and can you guess what his favorite title is dad and that's the topic of his newest book i'm
so excited for this conversation and thrilled that james is here because he's 1 of the busiest authors on the planet in fact he's currently working on 31 different projects but today he has stepped away from the writing desk and is pulling up a chair with you and me for a life changing conversation about fatherhood and maybe you're listening today and you're lucky enough like i am and your dad is still with us or for you maybe dad is the 1 you miss maybe he's the 1 you wish you had or you wish you understood or maybe you wanna know how to be the best dad the best person that you can be or heck you just wanna know how to do a little bit better james patterson is letting you in on the things you don't really hear dads talk about the expectations the uncertainty the pressure the regrets all that stuff that you normally have to read between the lines in order to figure out with the men in your life i mean it's not
so easy to be a good dad and even though dads tend to feel like they're supposed to have it all figured out lot of them don't and james patterson normally a master of mystery and suspense is here to lay it all on the table with heart humor and refreshing honesty and i'm personally so excited because i know so many dads out there love james patterson and this is 1 episode that i personally cannot wait to share with my dad and i hope you will do the same with yours
welcome to the mel robbins podcast i am thrilled that you're here and it is always such an honor to spend time together to be with you and today holy cow are you and i in for a spectacular treat we get to sit down with none other than james patterson and if you're a new listener i just wanna take a moment and personally welcome you to the mel robbins podcast family thank you for being here and because you made the time to listen to this particular episode here's what i know about you i know that you're either a mega james patterson fan or you are the kind of person who values the people in your life and you would love to know simple ways to improve your relationships with the people who matter most and i'm gonna tell you something if you're not a james patterson fan you will be after the conversation today james patterson has sold a mind blowing 400,000,000 copies of his books and counting i mean you can't step into anyone's house a bookstore a library even the tiniest airport newsstand around the world without spotting a james patterson title or heck 10 of them staring right back at you alex cross michael bennett the women's murder club james patterson has written everything from edge of your seat thrillers laugh out loud kids books jaw dropping true crime heartwarming tales of love and loss you name it if it's part of the human experience james patterson has written it and readers adore him having authored or coauthored over 200 books he's a literary legend and a machine and he just keeps on going and going and going and breaking records along the way james patterson holds the guinness world record for the most number 1 new york times bestsellers he's the first author to sell a million ebooks and the awards they just stack up like his stories but his impact goes far beyond what he creates james patterson is a philanthropist dedicated to improving literacy he's donated over a million books to students and to soldiers serving overseas he awards scholarships to future teachers and writers through the patterson family foundation and he has poured more than $9,000,000 into school libraries and independent bookstores across the united states and out of everything he's written and accomplished dad is still his favorite title his newest release is the number 1 dad book be the best dad you can be in 1 hour i've read it it's a fast funny and heartfelt read packed with the real life lessons james patterson wishes he'd known sooner
now he's come to our boston studios today for 1 reason to be here with you and to share those lessons with you lessons you'll wanna share with all the soon to be dads fathers grandfathers and father figures in your life and this is a pretty special moment for me because my dad hi dad happens to be 1 of the biggest james patterson fans i know so please help me welcome the 1 and only james patterson to the mel robbins podcast i am so thrilled you're here i i'm excited i really am and a lot of times with these things you don't get that excited but this time it this is this is a it's really fun i think well i'm
so excited to discuss your your newest book i mean you've got so many books but this 1 is really special the number 1 dad book be the best dad you can be in 1 hour i would love to start by just having you speak directly to the person who has found the time and made the time to be here with you and me today what might they experience about their life that could be different
if yeah i think person you know hopefully this book and i think it is in the spirit of what mel does with all of these podcasts which is to help a little and that's huge help a little to to make tomorrow a little better and in particular because this book affects everybody in your family it's for dads but in talking to dads and helping dads to be better it will help their partners and it will definitely help the kids and the grandparents even this book i think is in the spirit with with pretty much everything that mel does and and i think it's particularly useful because this isn't a book about well let's think about stuff and then we go home and nothing changes this is about doing this is about changing in good ways and it's not a book about perfect because i don't believe in that and i don't i don't know how anyways i don't think we can be every god can be perfect but not us this is about being better tomorrow than we were today and as i said the idea of doing this for the whole family is it's i i think it's a very useful thing and i'm i'm really excited about about spending some time with you and we're super excited to spend time with you and we're gonna dig into this book i love love love this book and i know you're gonna love it too and before we jump into the number 1 dad book and all the incredible lessons in it i just wanna take a step back and talk a little bit about your career yeah you were not born a best selling author yeah but the world knows you as probably the most successful living author today 400,000,000 copies of your books sold yeah too many way too many writes too many books but you know whatever 67 number 1 new york times bestsellers you've got 13 more books coming out this year alone and you have a really interesting story though because you didn't begin as a writer you were studying to get a phd and then went into advertising tell me a little bit about your background well i was in advertising but i've been clean for 30 years
now so thank you for bringing that up grew up in a small town upstate new york newburgh new york my father actually grew up in a poorhouse there his mother was charwoman she cleaned the bathrooms and the kitchens and he got they had shared a room in the basement and you know so kinda lower middle class in terms of the way way we grew up and i was a good student but i wasn't a big reader in high school catholic high school i moved up actually in this area my parents moved to lexington i worked at mclean hospital in belmont nearby mental hospital and i worked a lot of night shifts and i would go into cambridge like 3 times a week and just get these books you could buy them for 25¢ and i started reading reading reading and then i started scribbling and this turned around my life and i think saved me as a human being and has eliminated a lot of stress and source and difficulty from my life because somebody said you're lucky if you find something you like to do and then it's a miracle somebody will pay you to do it well in starting to read and reading stuff that i wanted to read and reading a lot of fiction and plays and whatever i found what i wanted to do i wasn't getting paid for it yet but that was that was just
so key to find this thing i knew that i wanted to be a writer
so do you remember the moment where you're like i think i wanna do this for a living
i i don't think i it wasn't that i wanted to do for a living but i wanted to do it i wanted to write novels i went down to vanderbilt for grad school and i was very lucky to have a professor there who just said you got it you have this thing you can you can do it i was writing a lot of short stories and i wrote the first book i was you know i i published it when it was '26 a thomas berryman number it got turned down by 31 publishers then it went in edgar as best first novel so go figure that 1 out and that's the thing in terms of people sometimes you get rejected you get rejected but you just if you believe in yourself just you know keep going and that was something that i did i kind of and this professor helped a lot because he said no you can do this you you have what it takes to to to be a really good writer or it it'll be successful or at least to make a living doing it wasn't it almost 20 years later though that along came the spider was published that's kind of the the alex cross novel that's 1 that my dad's like oh james patterson's my because i grew up with a dad who was always reading your books uh-huh always and
so it i think it's also important to note because more than anything you've not only been patient you've been persistent
mhmm
and i think that's a really important lesson when i look at your life from the outside
it's a simple thing with me i just love to do it mhmm you know i don't work for a living i play for a living honestly and that's you're so lucky i mean anybody that has that happen to them and it does with some people some nurses some teachers some they just love it my mother was a teacher for 50 years or so and that's i just wrote a nonfiction book about teachers it's so hard for them now because they're getting pressure from the left they're getting pressure from the right they're getting the kids are more unruly than they've ever been the parents some of them are
so inter so it's very very hard people are telling them how to teach how not to teach what does she do so it's really really really really really really hard it's just so important that the kids get educated and i do a lot in that area mostly literacy but something that i think that's even more important that i wish we could teach in school i'll just give you this which is thinkeracy
thinkeracy
thinkeracy which is teaching kids how to think like when they come in you know a typical kid what are you gonna do after school i don't know just getting them to say well you could read a book you could play soccer you could rob a liquor store either so many things just opening their brains up you know and and and if they could do that in school all the time you know because with the kids 1 of the things that they'll do is is the blank screen they panic
yes
let's say the subject was you gotta write a story about something blank screen okay you got a blank screen we got it just put a picture up in a blank screen anything you can think of a rabbit okay great you could write a you could write about a rabbit put another picture up there my mom making bread good you could write about that so how do we you know so think of see getting kids in the habit monstrous thing for your books for my books getting people in the habit how do you get them i did it once do it again do it again do it again but if they did that in schools it would be great for us there there are studies
now that kids they're they're doing less thinking less reasoning than ever and that's not good
because they're spending more time on their phones
i don't know what they're doing but they're not thinking
well what i also think is really interesting so you published your first book at the age of 26 after 31 rejections but you continued to work in advertising for a long time while you were writing books it's a really important part of your story because i think a lot of people think that you find the thing and then you just do that thing but you kept a day job
it didn't seem logical for me i didn't i didn't wanna put pressure on the writing i didn't wanna be in a situation where it's like if i don't get this published if i it's gonna really it's gonna be press i didn't want to to start dreading the thing that i loved mhmm
i think that's a huge takeaway that you had the insight to say i love this thing so much that if i were to jump in too soon and put pressure on it to make money
yeah
it actually squeezes the joy and the art out of the thing that i'm doing
yeah well that's that's just the way i looked at it yes
well i it's it's brilliant and actually there's a lot of research around entrepreneurs and they say that if an entrepreneur keeps their day job they are a third less likely to fail for precisely that reason uh-huh because you basically are spreading your bets and you're earning your money over here which takes the pressure off the thing that you're doing over there so it was an actual brilliant move
i don't know if it's it's just my dna or or something with my parents whatever in terms of well okay what's the consequence of that where's that gonna go is that gonna be a good thing for you so a little a little cautious but not in a bad way i think
that must also be a way in which you write is thinking through the consequences of what's happening next
well i i think part of it i mean that's why i do my outlines every and not everybody does this i interview i do interviews a little bit like michael connelly doesn't do outlines and bellagio doesn't do outlines but i do and i'm not a slave to them i mean i'll do my outline and it can be 50 60 70 pages and i always do change them because you're writing and you find that a character is more interesting than you thought they were gonna be or theoretically you were gonna get rid of the bad guy oh no but i want the bad guy to come back and you know so to be open to change is also important and i guess that's important in life too it's sort of like you have to outline your life right and you know to have a plan but not to worry about it i i think i'd like to and and the other thing i think is to be open and a lot of people aren't open they get to oh i never wanna do this i never well you don't know and i think even with kids how do you get them just to be open just consider this think about this don't you know people take kids out to see colleges and the kids go oh i love these buildings that's nice but you know in a month you'll stop noticing the buildings but what really is it about this school that's really gonna you know for example arson went to brown and the culture there is you're all smart
so don't beat each other up and support each other so that's the important thing about that school or 1 of the important things if that appeals to you then that's a good school for you much more important than i really like the buildings and it was so cute and you know da da da no no no that culture is that's really important if if that if that appeals to you
how do you come up with so many ideas
it's a it's a it's hell
what do you mean it's hell
no i'm kidding
it seems like a gift
it is yes it is a gift i just for whatever reason i just have this monstrous imagination i think a piece of it is growing up in newberg it was 7 or 8 acres my grandmother's it was just woods once again modest house that they built my grandmother and grandfather and then woods and i would wander out in those woods and just make up stories story story story story story story story and i think i just got into the habit of it i remember when i was going to vanderbilt i used to drive down there from massachusetts i was living there it was like 28 hours whoever the hell it was i would write musical plays going back and forth to vanderbilt i would just make up these plays and i would i would and i make them up on the spot and i would sing the songs i'm terrible singer and and create the characters as i was going and i you know i don't know it just it's somehow in my head i don't know why but maybe it's dreams i don't know where it comes from sometimes i'll i'll wake up and i'll be do i'll be in the middle of a story that i've been dreaming and then do you have like a notebook by your bed that you then make notes i used to but
now i what i found out is that if it's good you're gonna remember it and if you bother to write it down it wasn't that good you go like what what is this why didn't i write this down you know the good stuff i i think i remember
and do you typically work on 1 project no at a time
no no you know right now i think there are 31 live projects things that i'm working on
and so do you walk in and it's sort of like 1 of those docents like which one's pulling me toward today
i i kinda know i i i kinda know what the 1 or 2 or 3 that i'm messing around with are but the good thing about it is you you don't get writer's block that way
well you know it's interesting you say that because 1 of the things that i read about a technique or a strategy that you use that i found super helpful i'm like oh my gosh i wish i would have read this years ago as you said a lot of writers trip themselves up because they try to get the chapter perfect
mhmm and you
have this ability if the chapter's not working to just be like okay next
and yeah for me and i think for a lot of writers go on go to the next chapter get it on on the rewrite get it on the in the next rewrite and ultimately if you don't get it turn that chapter into a paragraph starting the next chapter
oh wait wait
that's great if you can't ultimately figure it out you just instead of killing yourself perfection in some things is the enemy of progress maybe not in certain tech areas but in a lot of things it's like nah don't worry about perfection just keep moving the ball forward pushing it up the whatever sisyphus etcetera for me anyway and i don't i never never ever ever give advice i just here's some thoughts here's some thoughts i mean part of it with the dad's book we'll get into it but part of it had to do with right through high school people always came to me for what do you think of this what do you think of that and that's that's a little of what got me doing that book the idea of i have a lot of thoughts to share and i also think you know we've only just met but i also think you're a very sincere and kind person you come across as very very caring
so i think it's not only that you have a lot of thoughts to share as you share them there is a a very kind and caring intent behind the way in which you share
the thoughts a weird yeah i think that's an interesting i don't know that it's totally accurate but
i'll ask sue
yeah i think i think she would say that but but i get more pleasure out of giving than receiving i i just literally it just works better for me and the way i grew up in particular with my grandparents they were just very giving they just that was their deal they you know they they would do little soup kitchens and just just and that's just the way it was and they didn't want pats on the back or you know like i'm gonna go to heaven or just that's just the way they were and and i kinda do the same thing
1 of the things that you're doing in addition to 31 open projects that you're working on right now is you have started doing a lot of writing on the subscription platform substack
a little bit yeah
yeah and yours is called hungry dogs and it has a great backstory where does that name come from
my grandmother she had that line hungry dogs run faster which is yeah that makes sense and you know and she brought me up in particular and my sisters to some extent to be kinda hungry dogs in a good way and and she also was big on go chop wood just you know go go do it get it done just don't make excuses just go out there and chop wood and i think and once again it was never with her it was never she wasn't gonna stress you out she wasn't gonna you know beat you up if you didn't do it i mean i think the only thing they ever did was you know you get a 97 on a test and i go why didn't you get a 100 and then they'd let it go but that was about the extent of pressure and and i think that was healthy and good and it was it was stimulating with stimulating as opposed to just cramming you up and and and putting pressure on you that's not particularly useful
so at you know when you reach your seventies i wouldn't like think that you'd be thinking you're a hungry hungry dog but you're not slowing down at all and so what drives you at this stage in your life
drive i don't know that it probably drive is a good word but i never think of it that way 1 of the things that helped a lot during covid i wrote my autobiography i wasn't planning to but i just started writing down a few stories and i went i'm really enjoying this process a and b i said i really wanna i wanna write this well i wanna really concentrate on the sentences more than i have been in the fiction that helped me in my i think the writing that i've been doing the last couple years is the best i've ever done in terms of and that and that's why the autobiography just got me paying more attention to the sentences again which i did way back and then got a little less i don't know why lazy or something lazy i don't know that well yeah lazy let's call it lazy well what's the difference there's gotta be a big difference between writing fiction versus really writing an autobiography what was that like for you it was fun it was great and and 1 of the things with the autobiography i said i'm just gonna tell stories i mentioned my father growing up in the newburgh poorhouse and you know that kind of stuff and that's that doesn't i don't get any credit for that but it's just interesting to me he was about to go off to the war and he got this phone call and this guy guy said you know my name is george hazleton i live in port jervis which is about 20 miles away he said just bear with me for just a couple of minutes he said last night my parents after dinner said george come on down to the living room we wanna talk to you and they said we love you
so much but you're going away to war and we have to tell you we're not your natural parents and we adopted you and then over the phone this george hazleton said to my father i'm your brother and that's how my father found out he had a brother just pretty stunning story wow they both survived the war they came back and after they came back 3 or 4 years later my uncle called up again he said i i found our father and you know they had never met him in a way that they would remember he had run off he had he had a terrible irish guy just terrible reputation as kind of a drunk and whatever and he said he's he's in poughkeepsie and i wanna let's go up and see him tonight my father said i don't wanna meet the bastard
so my uncle shy guy went up by himself little crummy little bar under the bridge hudson river going over to new paltz and and there's his father to his knowledge he's never seen the guy before and my uncle sits in there for like 20 minutes he doesn't drink he orders a coca cola or something and he watches this guy his father who he's never met and he's so turned off by the guy he leaves without ever introducing himself to and until recently i didn't even know the name of my grandfather it happened to be robert but i didn't know that and you know just stories like that well that's a big 1 3 page well the whole book it's just full of stuff like that just stories stories stories stories yeah wow how how does that story impact you when you think about fatherhood my and this relates to to the number 1 dad book mhmm the only time i remember hugging my father was on his deathbed and that says a lot and and in therapy i learned that 1 of the reasons that i would get angry sometimes was just it was my father yeah and and i had to sort of at times go that's not that yelling at this cab driver that's not me that's just it's stupid that's ridiculous it's it's irrational and that's just this whatever pent up anger a and b don't blame him he was doing the best he could and i think he was and 1 of my best friends from college sue and i were having dinner over there and with their 2 sons both played football high school football and after dinner they the the boys were going out the front door and and my friend said you know where do you where are you guys going and they stopped and they came over and they gave him a hug and i said yeah there's a life lesson right there there are these 2 big football but it didn't matter you know that they were football players but he insisted on having a hug
so with our son jack every single night and to this day if he comes home he gets a hug i when i came here i got a hug i like that yeah i do too and and not everybody's a hugger but the book number 1 dad book it's about those little and once again not lectures or anything and making it work for for guys that hugs are are are a good thing and it's a page but but and it and the book is just full of all of those thoughts that can be helpful to guys
well you know i love that you're writing this and i also am happy that you shared that story about your own dad and your uncle and your grandfather did your dad ever tell you that he loved you
no not that language
did he ever tell you that he was proud of you
yes the book the book writing he always wanted to be a writer he wasn't he was an insurance salesman he did the best he could and he he he made a living for help my mother was a teacher between the 2 of them they were functioning alcoholic so that was a problem but but once again they did the best they could
yeah and i think 1 of the things that's really amazing about what you said because it's a very you're giving people grace nobody can pass on what they weren't given
mhmm
and when you share the story of what happened in your dad's life and the fact that his own father wasn't present
yeah and it
was also a very different time and a different generation
mhmm yeah oh yeah yeah
when you can look at your parents through compassionate eyes
mhmm
you can understand that you may have deserved something different or wanted something different but they could only give you what they have to give
these life lessons and coming to grips with my father huge understanding that i wanted to write more than anything and that that i was gonna do it i was with a woman for 7 years she developed a brain tumor and this was the first love of my life and it was just 1 of the it was just a great relationship and not just looking back at it it just was and everybody who knew us was just a wonderful relationship she developed a brain tumor and after she died and this was also so important to me in terms of you know my journey whatever you wanna call it what i realized after she died was that 1 you could deal with death in a heroic way which she did unbelievable just the way she dealt with she would you know she never wanted her friends to get bummed out they would come she'd be wearing a funny hat or something just she didn't want them to get bummed out just her spirit was unbelievable but i also realized and this was
so important for me in terms of maintaining a certain balance in my life and stability and being able to live inside my own shoes is that i understood that 1 i could love someone in a significant way love love love love somebody and also that i was lovable which is huge huge and i think it's particularly huge for guys the idea that get past the mask and the phoniness or whatever that you this person this guy is actually lovable and if we could get more guys to that place they would have better lives did you not feel lovable as a kid based on how your dad treated you i i don't think it was just my dad i believe that the only reason that they i'm gonna overstate this that as long as i was top of my class that i was okay
so that was that that that that was whatever love i was getting whatever that it was because of that
i think a lot of men and young men feel that way
as long as you too
yes but men in particular as long as i'm providing as long as i'm performing as long as i'm working as long as i'm doing something out there yeah that's the worth
and that's going away for a lot of them now so they have to adjust yes which is 1 of the reasons why in terms of of of this book the number 1 dad book you know my realization that so many guys out there are lost overwhelmed they're no longer the breadwinner or whatever they thought they're gonna be or the warrior or whatever is built up in you know their brains over centuries that it's all changing they are they are lost and they and and a lot of them are angry and to help to help them because we did a little bit of research and we reached out and talked to about 4,000 people which is double what quinnipiac does yeah well just a couple of questions and 1 of them was and this is a really interesting 1 to me could you be a better dad and 89% of the dads said yes they could be better dads that was fascinating to me let's take a quick break give our sponsors a chance to share a few words and i also wanna give you a chance to share this with people in your life whether it's people who are aspiring writers or your dad or a father figure or your grandfather or your brother or a friend that just had a baby for the first time or i'm thinking about my brother my brother's gonna love this he's got 2 twin 16 year old boys shout out to my nephews but he's gonna love this conversation because it reminds you of
so much that you know to be true but don't we all need these reminders of course we do and who better to give it to us than the legendary james patterson don't go anywhere because we're gonna be waiting for you after this short break stay with us welcome back it's your buddy mel robbins and you and i are spending time learning and laughing and enjoying the lessons from none other than james patterson i love this book the number 1 dad book be the best dad you can be in an hour and 1 of the things that i love about this is you consistently put the focus on being a better father mhmm not a perfect 1 why why is that important doesn't work perfect for me i mentioned a little earlier about even when i was in high school and all the way through people would always come to me and say what do you think about this what do you think about this would this girl like me etcetera etcetera etcetera and then as i got older a lot of my friends and relatives they would have you know younger males come and you know what uncle jim or you know jim or whatever what do you think about this and in talking to
so many of these guys i began to get a feeling for once again this lost in space kind of thing that these guys are feeling and who am i and what's my purpose and what's the point and then getting lost in sort of frivolous stuff like cars or i mean cars are fine but i mean you're just really getting over because they have nothing else that meant something in their life and that was a big thing in terms of why i wanted to do this book and the notion of being able to help people some and and in this case it's huge because if you help these dads who are lost somewhat you're gonna help the kids you're gonna help the partners and i purposely did the 1 hour because a lot of guys will not read the 400 page book
so what and 1 of my gifts is to be able to compress information well you
know what else i love about this because this is by the way james going to be my number 1 gift to every new father what i love about this is i could put this in a bathroom i could put this in a bedroom i can pick it up and i can read any chapter out of order or any little essay and i wanna read 1 of them i'm reading on page 65 and there are these short beautiful vignettes and 1 of the lessons is your presence is required and you were just talking about how so many men and dads are feeling lost or they're focused on the wrong things or they're distracted and
so here's 1 of the essays
focused on the wrong things is is beautiful i mean it's not in the book but your words that's that's exactly right
here's 1 of my trade secrets when i'm writing a novel i sometimes scroll a note to myself at the top of the page that says be there it reminds me that i need to put the reader in the scene so that they'll really feel it the same goes for being a dad let's be honest there's lots of distractions in life the internet zoom calls with in laws night shifts netflix the nfl draft there will be times when you can only give your kids part of your attention but whenever you can as much as you can focus it's not just being around although that's a big part of it it's paying attention setting other thoughts aside and really being present there are some woo woo terms for this intention mindfulness but what it comes down to is this when you're with your kids be there have you ever seen little kids on a school stage lighting up when they spot their parents in the audience it's like they're witnessing a miracle
now you're the miracle you might not be able to be at every recital every birthday party and every game but be it as many as you can it matters sure someone else can shoot video of a game or a birthday but it's only live once years later your kids will not remember what song they sang what flavor cake they had or whether they won or lost that third match of the season but they'll remember if you were there
mhmm mhmm mhmm yeah and that's a personal 1 for me because somewhere in the book i say something to the effect of had i done this research had i thought about it i i could have been a better dad i could have been and and 1 of the things would be literally be there i was there in the sense that i worked at home and i you know i was with around jack a lot but i could have been more intensely present than i was at times so i was i would be distracted presence at times and and so and that would have been better
how did becoming a father later in life really change you
well 1 of the advantages that sue and i had is that we didn't have financial problems and that's that takes something that baggage out of the way which is huge so we didn't have that we were both totally prepared for it we were more mature obviously i you know the thing of it was is that jane and i the woman i was with originally who died we would have been married and had you know it just didn't and then i i took me a long time to get past that but i always wanted to have kids and then when i got together with sue she wanted to have you know kids as well and we got she when i i think i was 49 when we got married i think she was 39 sue is interesting too my joke line about sue is if sue ever leaves me i'm going with her
but the but the real the real the real story is every once in a while there are a couple hours where i can't stand her but there's never a day goes by that i'm not in love with her and that's true and and we pretty much every night hold hands when we go to sleep which is which is a not everybody can do that but but that's i think it's nice if you can if you can do it
there are just so many beautiful beautiful essays in here i i wanna i i would like for you to read this 1 this is on page 1 0 1
guys guys let's face it we screw up a lot i know i do sometimes royally but here's the silver lining that means we can be really really good at teaching kids about resilience and how to confront challenges and deal with mistakes and own them which i think is huge life isn't always fair i love this section by the way not because i wrote it because i just think there's truth here life isn't always fair you already know that but it's important that your kids learn it too you don't have to be overly negative or pessimistic just realistic muhammad ali used to say there's nothing wrong with getting knocked down as long as you get right back up don't be afraid to discuss tough topics with your kids they can take it help them make good decisions get them ready for the real world which is 1 of our biggest as parents i mean that's there was 1 thing that said get them ready for the real world it's not getting any easier out there which i think you know to be honest it seems to be getting harder every year you don't need to scare them just prepare them how did you prepare jack
well i think a lot of it is is teaching him to sort of be responsible for his own actions to be comfortable in his own skin i think that's huge if you can if you can help kids to to be to you know the things that you love to do being goofy he was very goofy okay that's okay you can be goofy be careful of it in school overdoing it in school and and in his situation and and i don't know how this relates to your kids but yeah people know your dad and your mom was a big swimmer and whatever but don't worry about it it's all fine accept it within reason and then and just move on and and 1 of the things in going to a pretty good prep school and then a a good college he had a lot of kids who came either parents were well known or had had done something famous or whatever and and all of his friends were cool none of them they all of them had this thing i didn't do anything i i had there's no reason for me to be and i think that's really good and occasionally you'd meet every once in a while there'd be 1 you'd go well you know who my dad is blah blah blah you know who cares i mean i mean that's cruel too but but we try not to do that it's like be comfortable with who we are hopefully but you know don't let it get in the way you know this feels like a really good moment to hit the pause button and allow our awesome sponsors to share a few words and i also wanna give you a chance to share this amazing conversation with james patterson with people that you love whether they love james patterson or you just think they're gonna love this conversation take a minute and share it and don't go anywhere because james patterson and i are gonna be waiting for you after a short break
so stay with us welcome back it's your buddy mel robbins and today you and i are sitting down with the 1 and only james patterson 400,000,000 copies of his books have been sold and today we are unpacking the lessons learned the regrets the wisdom in his new book the number 1 dad book
so james you know i reached out to jack
oh really okay
yes well that little
creep didn't tell me
and and
i thought i could trust him
i'm very persuasive and i have something to play for you
hi dad surprise and hi mel so mel wanted me to share a bit about the impact that you've had on my life your strength as a parent at least from my perspective was helping me confidently be my own person i sometimes felt like i found myself completely trapped in the shadow of my dad and that can be you know a little disempowering you know someone goes oh well you know that's
so and so's kid or they even sometimes they would call me james right my name's jack james isn't even my legal name you know someone just seeing you as the son or daughter of insert person here that may seem innocuous but i think it really can eat at you and so you know for me as someone who kinda aim for the moon and seems to you know maybe not be landing on the moon but at least getting somewhere i sort of developed an obsession with overachieving
so much that i could kind of prove to this like imaginary composite person taking up real estate in my mind that you know no way full stop it's it's it's me it's not him and i think your best quality as a parent dad at least for me was encouraging me when possible not to think that way you know not holding your success over my head as much as possible not falling into the trap of being the successful person who who made my childhood into a pressure cooker
so good job
he's funny
he's he's see what good writer he could have been too he's a really good writer he has no interest in it which i get but he's he's a really really good writer and and and very funny he could have been a comedian he's very he wasn't being funny here but he can be hilarious anyway all that that that's great that's great i'm i'm glad that he glad he likes something that i did excellent
i think he liked more than just something
yeah well you know here's the thing about jack jack calls 3 or 4 times a week which is nice and you know so so and he wants to talk to sue more than me but he talks to both of us you know so it's that's a rewarding thing
well he's clearly a very mature and very self aware guy
mhmm
and it's clear in the way that he described his experience that he was aware of the pressure he's putting on himself yeah and the compliment that he clearly gave you is that you didn't do that to him mhmm so if the person who's listening really relates to your story cause they're like well i didn't have a really good example either
like 1 of the things that i get from you and reading your book is that even if it wasn't modeled for you you have the ability to actually change how you show up and be a different kind of dad mhmm
well i think we all do on some level you just have to commit to it you know with with let them you have that 1 piece which i which i love i just it it actually a a small piece of it and and actually something i talked to with president clinton about this notion of don't let's not waste our life or our time worrying about stuff we can't do anything about mhmm and if we can do something let's do
it which fictional character that you've created and written about has had the biggest impact
alex cross on the
way that you think about fatherhood
yeah yeah actually across michael bennett who who has this big family and and i i like doing stories where you go like well gee that would never michael bennett has like 9 or 10 kids and you go like what yeah but i love it the the fact that it is so outrageous and then making it work but in both cases what those stories are about on some level is balancing your work life with your with your home life that's what alex does and you know in the series that's on prime video with with alex we have aldous hodge who has this real intense look
so when he's out there as a cop you really feel that and at home and he's a new father as a human being but in the story he's great with the kids and that balance which i think is huge there's a thing in the book about the 5 balls which is a great little story that i think it was very useful for me anyway which is if you think of life as you're juggling these 5 balls and it's family and health and i'll lose track of some of them spirits which is sort of soul work is 1 and if you drop family if you drop work it's a rubber ball and it bounces if you drop 1 of the others family or health along the way it's not rubber and and and it gets scuffed or it might even shatter i think for most of us and this relates to this book as well in terms of why i think it's useful for people at the end of the day when we're looking back at our lives it's gonna be more how we raised our family mhmm in terms of the most important job you're ever gonna have is as a mom and a dad it's gonna be more important than whatever that you ever did than being selling insurance or being accountant or whatever i mean and to realize that a little bit and have that drive you and it helps you to put up with some of the stuff you have to put up with and you realize just you know that that's that's probably the most important thing that we do it's a really profound thing to hear you say because i think from the outside somebody would look at the body of work and the impact that you've made having sold more than 400,000,000 books and the series and movies and the way that these stories have transported and inspired and yeah like really enriched people's lives and they would probably think that for you it would be that artistry and that body of work yeah well you know it's interesting mel that i don't i don't look at that stuff as being all that impressive or anything it just there it is i i interviewed peggy noonan about a week or
so ago and both she and i we tend to be looking forward rather than backward i do i just don't you know people go do you have regrets i don't really think about regrets much i'm sure i do but i it's mainly okay what's next what are we gonna do next so the thing about selling all the books and all that i mean i'm happy you know it's helped me to live a good life and in particular the being able to do what i love to do
so 1 of the things that you've talked about is the importance to you and your wife sue to really support literacy
mhmm
and 1 of the essays is about reading read to your kids i'm on page 45 you read it doesn't take much time to make a big difference reading to your kids helps boost their brainpower it gives them new worlds and new ways of putting them together talk more about why this is so important as a dad to read to your kids
if it works and and 1 of the things that i say in the book which i think is useful is there's gonna be certain things in here you're not gonna be able to do or you're not gonna agree with and it doesn't matter the important thing here is at the end of this book and i think this is gonna be true for every dad out there pretty much i'm gonna guess at that anyway if you read the book and you keep your mind open you're gonna pick up 2 or 3 or 4 things that are gonna make you better at what you're doing and you'll be happier about it you'll be more fulfilled so i don't you know the reading to the i think it's really useful it's not for everybody because some people they just it's just not their thing and that's okay but i do think and in particular and there were studies about this that if you have books if you read to your kids if you talk to your kids a lot their vocabularies are just gonna increase dramatically
so when they get to kindergarten or first grade they'll be so ahead of the pack 1 of the things that i've been working on with university of florida for now 5 or 6 years the percentage of kids reading at grade level in this country is like 43 percent which is a disgrace
disgraceful
when i was growing up small town little catholic school everybody in our in our class could read everybody could read everybody what what what the hell is going on this is insanity so we've adopted ways of teaching kids to read that don't work and and it's true in in pretty much every state massachusetts very the percentage here is under 50% that's ridiculous it's insane alright university of florida has this program they can get it up into the eighties and it's just so it's now in i think 13 counties in florida canada picked it up like crazy we're making a little documentary about it and i visited some schools and you sit in these classes you could fake it for 10 minutes but i'll sit for like an hour and these kids are
so turned on by this program a lot of it is going back to phonics and stuff and and the kids are so they love it it's fun they're excited and the scores just go up up up up up even some of these schools where the percentage of kids reading in grade level is like 10% all of a sudden it's up into the fifties and sixties 1 of the things that i'll talk about when i go out and talk to teachers and librarians or whatever i'm here to save lives and and i'm i don't mean i am but the program is
what is your most favorite essay in this book do you have 1
no i don't think so and what i try to do at the end is is to help people here's here are some of the things in case you're forgetting i encourage them to go through and and cross out stuff or star stuff that they like
and you know yes you have you have some you have a really really great thing at the end if just 2 or 3 or 5 of these ideas work for you you'll be a better dad yeah and that's 1 hour very well spent be consistently fair trust really is built on consistency and trust is everything what is it important to be consistent about
the trust is everything is a real thing you just need if your kids trust you if you trust them within reason that's that's huge that that will last you will always have a a relationship with them a good relationship consistency if you think about sports if the refs aren't consistent in a football game if they're like oh sometimes they play it close some think it would let it give them a lot of room it the game doesn't work and that consistency like here's kind of within reason the way we operate and and you know and if the kids go that's just not fair you need to listen to them a little bit and and and someday obviously you know we're having a bad day and we we we're not gonna be consistent we shit our mouth off more than we should and there i mean and there were things in there about you know try i know this isn't totally possible but try not to have arguments in front of the kids especially heated ones especially if it's about them take it outside we talk about that doing that which is which is which is really important talk about things like being guys being able to say i was wrong this is an important 1 well and the and the line i throw in there you know once again i try to keep it semi humorous because you want the guys to sort of not think they're getting preached to and i'm not preaching i'm just trying to stop but i was wrong and then i said just in case it ever happens which is yes it is important because a lot of guys think that if they if they if they admit they were wrong that somehow it lessens them as a human as a guy as a no i was wrong and this is why this book is
so important it's why i'm going to buy it for every single new dad that i know is because i think that you get just caught up in the day to day and in your emotions and being tired and just the grind of it all that it's easy to forget the things that you know deep down are true
yeah
you know what i think about this book i think people are gonna read it in an hour and they're gonna get a tremendous amount out of it but i think it's 1 of these books that stays with you and that you keep on your desk
mhmm and
if you were to just pick this up once a day or a couple times a week and you read 1 2 page essay
yeah
it's almost like walking into a church and hearing the sermon that you needed to hear
it just gives you a grounding point to yeah have you focus on 1 thing
mhmm
that will make you a better dad and a better person
know this mel and it's it's obvious in in everything that you do if you want to move forward if you wanna be better if you wanna eliminate certain things from your life you must form habits it has to be habits
you know jack had a question for you
okay
and so i'd love to play this question you guys clearly have a very playful relationship
he's very funny he's very funny
so i'm gonna play the video for you
be gentle jack
so my question to you is looking back if you could do it over again you know what would you have done differently and what do you think your shortcomings were
yeah i think you know a piece of it is is is to be there better to be there to be i tend to be distracted i tend to i'm creative i'm always thinking of something else when i'm you know whatever so being there more for him would have been huge and then agreeing to more sue's very she'll travel anywhere they go to iceland together i should have done more of the trips with them i have a little just personally like we go to florence and after 2 days i've seen enough jack we can go for a week let's go to another church let's go he loves that kind of stuff
so i should have i should have been better at that kind of thing i think that would have been helpful that would have a little better bonding you know would have come out of that for sure
so you said you talked earlier about preparing your child for the world we live in and the world certainly is changing
mhmm mhmm
where do you even begin as a parent
i have a a nonfiction book coming at the end of the year disrupt everything
really
and it has to do with this age of disruption we're in now which is just insanity and i don't just mean what's going on with the government just in general there's so much i mean disease weather college sports everything you look at it's all just changing and if we don't and a lot of it is is from our point of view becomes negative our our work our business people are getting fired it's it's a very tough situation and if we don't learn to disrupt positively it it it's gonna be very hard for people
so this that book is about disrupting positively
is there anything that you would love to see dads disrupt in terms of the old model of fatherhood
once again that's why and i i wish i had 1 thing yep but there are so many there's things about trust about listening listening is huge you know listening a lot of dads a lot of people in general they they don't listen telling telling kids your story listening to their story to the kids' story getting them comfortable walking in their own shoes getting them comfortable helping them to figure out what the core of them is and that that core is not yeah i know you got the acne and that really is irritating but that's not who you are don't worry about that that's we get it and it's we've we've had acne you don't understand well you're right i don't entirely understand or the clothes closer okay but that's not who you are that's not who you are who is that what's that core what's that core jack our jack that was always the thing of what is that you know okay the shoes but the shoes they won't matter that much i know you have a thing in general about people which i agree with you know stop buying stupid stuff try not to i maybe it is the way to make you feel better temporarily but just be a little mindful of that well you know what i heard in jack's acknowledgment of you is that the thing that you did really well is that you did teach him that he is himself at his core mhmm he's not just your son yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah and you did a good job at that can you did you were you able to hear that acknowledgement yeah yeah yeah yeah no no no and and it was that was probably the thing that sue and i concentrated on the most just making him comfortable being jack mhmm understanding who jack is right
now and that could change who he was when he was 12 who you know and just be comfortable with that
1 of the things that i also love about your book james is that it's not just for dads
mhmm
so on page 1 45 you have an essay you're not a dad and that's a 100% okay what about the guys who aren't dads whether by choice or by circumstances being a dad isn't for everyone
yeah
maybe you wanted children but you weren't in the right relationship at the right time maybe you have a medical history that makes having kids challenging or not possible maybe you just don't really wanna spend all that time with rugrats
and the thing i don't put in there is maybe you can't find a partner
yes
which is true for a lot of males now yeah and and women
yeah and you know you talk about the fact but chances are there are still plenty of quote dad opportunities for you you care about the world its future and the kids growing up in it those kids may not be your own sons and daughters but they need your help everybody needs somebody who believes in them shows them how to get to where they're going makes them feel seen and heard you know you offer like some suggestions here again another thing i love about this book it's not just essays that make you think it's essays that encourage you to do be a mentor you work hard at your job you've learned a lot about life don't keep it to yourself that's a way that you can apply the lessons of this book be a coach if you love sports you played sports you know sports everyone remembers their favorite coach be that guy be an uncle if you have a brother or sister with kids you've got a potentially terrific role to play with your nieces and nephews and 1 day when you have kids you can be their favorite oh wait that's right you're talking about nieces and nephews and that you can play catch play minecraft find the last piece of a jigsaw puzzle but let them put it in oh i love that mhmm mhmm let them put in the last piece of a jigsaw puzzle yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah well part of it is once again it's just going to the
next step in in in whatever the heck it is that you're doing there's also a chapter in there about grandparents which is another important thing grandfathers grandmothers really important to to families and sometimes you know the relationships with the grandparents might not be so good with with from the from the father's point of view or the mother's point of view but do your best to let them in anyway yes because they might not be the same people they were when you were growing up they might be kinder gentler or whatever the heck it is and it's useful for the kids to to hear their experiences they're gonna they they'll know things about the family that that you might not remember or whatever mhmm more of the dna of the family and all that stuff is is is useful for the for the kids and a lot of it has to do with the kids 1 you know just such an important thing about this is this is not the book about perfect this is a book about getting better because perfect don't work
so to the person that's listening right now who's just in the thick of it i mean you know there's legos all over the floor and diapers to change it's in that messy state
we talk about diapers we talk about to think you know and and and for the guy to get in there and and do it hold your nose and and clean up there's a funny chapter about diaper changing
very funny but there's also something more poignant which is about how quickly this all goes
yeah oh yeah
and so what do you wanna tell the person that's listening
well you know the thing of it is as difficult as it as some of the days may be you know 20 years from now 15 years from now you'd give a million dollars to have that experience back again which which i think is mostly true and and and part of it is is just help me get through the day that's always and and if you're getting better if things are improving that always helps you know the idea that today's better than yesterday in some way even even if if if a lot of stuff isn't working that well that's that's useful you know 1 of the things that you know i i think a lot about in terms of the topic of advice is that i personally believe that you are best equipped to help the person you used to be mhmm mhmm and that if you are open as you are and you go through life with an open mind and an open heart you can learn something from absolutely everybody that you meet mhmm and
so i think what you've achieved in the number 1 dad book honestly because you keep saying i didn't boil it down to 1 thing i think you actually did i think you created not only something that you can read in an hour but i think you created a lifeline for somebody to just open up
mhmm
and be able to be reminded of the power that you have to do just a little better today mhmm and every single 1 of the essays that you've written will help you do it
yeah well that's very kind of you and touching and and and i think there's some truth there boy i i i love the idea that tomorrow i can be a little better yes at something
so my favorite essay is the 1 you wrote on page 95 and i would love to have you read it
kids benefit from seeing their parents respecting each other and being affectionate with each other a little parental pda can show them what a healthy loving relationship looks like so let them see you holding hands let them see you hug let them see you kiss let them hear you say i love you which i think is monstrously important if people can do it if you do it often enough they'll learn not to chirp every time they see you hugging or kissing or whatever
now some dads will say i'm not an i love you kind of guy says who who passed that law your dad your dad's dad you can be an i love you guy you can change at least a little you'll be a better man for it saying i love you is not a sign of weakness it's a sign of strength now go ahead say i love you was that so hard if it was say it again okay i'll say it i love you man i love you james patterson thank you i love you too you're right awesome this is fun this is nice this is actually in some ways the nicest experience i've had of this sort since hanging out with dolly parton well i've loved every minute of getting to meet you of getting to sit down and learn from you you are delightful you are
so caring and i'm gonna reflect this back to you you are such a caring curious smart and loving guy thank you james and thank you thank you for being here with me and james patterson and i know james already told you that he loves you man but i wanted to be sure that i told you that i love you and i believe in you and i believe in your ability to create a better life and there were so many amazing moments and nuggets and pieces of wisdom that james shared with you and me today that i am certain that this conversation will help you and the people that you share this with do exactly that alrighty i will see you in the very
next episode i'll be waiting to welcome you in the moment you hit play i'll see you there i'm so thrilled that you're here we're having a new start yet i'm so damn excited i'm already starting the show and we're not even rolling sorry okay i'm ready
rehearsal yeah we that was great that was great mel that was great
i'm very persuasive and i have something to play for you
oh okay oh this this makes me a little frightened where do i see it oh it's coming okay alright here comes jackie this is
on page 1 0 1
let me get my spectacles
now those glasses are the same style
i know
how do you know which ones that you're wearing why do you not have progressives
i don't know i i can i because i i never been able to i'd like trip over stairs and stuff
boom we got it
that's it that's it any last words no no just kidding
oh and 1 more thing and no this is not a blooper this is the legal language you know what the lawyers write and what i need to read to you this podcast is presented solely for educational and entertainment purposes i'm just your friend i am not a licensed therapist and this podcast is not intended as a substitute for the advice of a physician professional coach psychotherapist or other qualified professional got it good i'll see you in the
next episode stitcher